AI Factories are dynamic ecosystems that foster innovation, collaboration, and development in the field of artificial intelligence (AI). They bring together the necessary ingredients – computer power, data, and talent– to create cutting-edge generative AI models. They foster collaboration across Europe, linking universities, supercomputing centers, industry, and financial actors. AI factories serve as hubs driving advancements in AI applications across various sectors such as health, manufacturing, climate, finance, and more. 

The Commission has identified the establishment of AI factories as a priority, planning to launch the first ones in 2025. This initiative, highlighted in the political guidelines of Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, aims to turn Europe into the "AI continent". The Commission’s goal is to set up AI Factories across Europe, reinforcing the EU commitment to advancing AI technology and innovation.

In December 2024, the European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (EuroHPC) selected seven consortia to establish the first AI Factories across Europe, marking a significant step towards the creation of a robust AI ecosystem. The seven AI Factories involve 15 Member States and 2 EuroHPC participating States: Portugal, Romania and Türkiye have joined Spain; Austria and Slovenia have joined Italy; and Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Norway and Poland have joined the Finland. With an investment of around €1.5 billion from the EU and Member States, these sites will deploy new AI-optimised supercomputers and upgrade existing systems, significantly enhancing Europe's AI capabilities. The first seven AI Factories are expected to begin operations in April 2025.

In March 2025, the EuroHPC announced the selection of another six new AI Factories located in Austria, Bulgaria, France, Germany, Poland, and Slovenia. They represent a combined national and EU investment of around €485 million. 

# https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/ai-factories